[DOC-566] TA-23476 Update Tech advisory (#25091)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/releases/techadvisories/ta-23476.md

| {{<product "ycql">}}       | {{<release "All">}} | {{<issue 11052>}}, {{<issue 23476>}} | {{<release "2.25.0.0, 2024.1.4.0, 2024.2.1.0, 2.20.9.0">}} |

## Description

In YCQL, timestamp data inserted with the `currenttimestamp()` function or explicit timestamp strings with microseconds precision may not be returned for queries with an equality condition on the timestamp. This can cause discrepancies during queries or index scans on tables where timestamps were part of the primary key. The data can still be retrieved as expected by primary key or index-only scan queries with no condition or inequality conditions on the timestamp column.

The root cause is that in YCQL, the timestamp type has millisecond precision, to align with vanilla Cassandra, ensuring compatibility with Cassandra drivers and tools. However, YCQL can internally store data with microsecond precision, adjusting the precision to milliseconds when data is sent or received through the YCQL API. The discrepancy between the wire protocol's millisecond precision and the storage system's microsecond precision can lead to unexpected behavior.

## Mitigation

### For new writes

> For versions before `2.25.0.0, 2024.1.4.0, 2024.2.1.0, and 2.20.9.0`, you can adjust the new writes to use the correct precision as follows by modifying your application to use `totimestamp(now())` instead of `currenttimestamp()` to generate millisecond-precision timestamp values that are compatible with the wire protocol.

Reviewer: Lets hyperlink the releases as 

`{{<release "2.25.0.0, 2024.1.4.0, 2024.2.1.0, 2.20.9.0">}}`

Author: Made the changes, but we don't have 2.25 and 2024.2.1.0 right now, left them outside.

> For versions starting from `2.25.0.0, 2024.1.4.0, 2024.2.1.0, and 2.20.9.0`, the database can automatically convert timestamps with microsecond precision to milliseconds if ``cql_revert_to_partial_microsecond_support`` flag is set to ``false`` (default is `true`). When this flag is disabled (set to `false`), timestamps with microsecond precision are truncated (i.e., floored) to milliseconds before being stored in underlying storage, ensuring consistency with the YCQL layer. When the flag is set to true, timestamps are stored in the underlying storage with the microseconds precision.

Reviewer: Same as above

|          Product           |  Affected Versions  |  Related Issues   | Fixed In |
| :------------------------- | :------------------ | :---------------- | :------- |
| {{<product "ycql">}}       | {{<release "All">}} | {{<issue 11052>}}, {{<issue 23476>}} | {{<release "2.25.0.0, 2024.1.4.0, 2024.2.1.0, 2.20.9.0">}} |

## Description

> In YCQL, timestamp data inserted with the `currenttimestamp()` function or explicit timestamp strings with microseconds precision may not be returned for queries with an equality condition on the timestamp. This can cause discrepancies during queries or index scans on tables where timestamps were part of the primary key. The data can still be retrieved as expected by primary key or index-only scan queries with no condition or inequality conditions on the timestamp column.

Reviewer 2: > explicit timestamp strings with microseconds precision
good to provide an example (e.g. 2024-08-26 19:23:38.537281+0000)

Author: are you asking to add an example or replace the line as you suggested?

@utkarsh-um-yb

Author: Hey @utkarsh-um-yb based on my understanding of your comment, I've added the timestamp example, if you were saying something do let me know I make the changes later on.

The root cause is that in YCQL, the timestamp type has millisecond precision, to align with vanilla Cassandra, ensuring compatibility with Cassandra drivers, and tools. However, YCQL can internally store data with microsecond precision, adjusting the precision to milliseconds when data is sent, or received through the YCQL API. The discrepancy between the wire protocol's millisecond precision and the storage system's microsecond precision can lead to unexpected behavior.

## Mitigation

### For new writes

> For versions before v2.25.0.0, v2024.2.1.0, {{<release "2024.1.4.0, 2.20.9.0">}}, you can adjust the new writes to use the correct precision as follows by modifying your application to use `totimestamp(now())` instead of `currenttimestamp()` to generate millisecond-precision timestamp values that are compatible with the wire protocol.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For versions before v2.25.0.0, v2024.2.1.0, {{<release "2024.1.4.0">}}, and {{<release "2.20.9.0">}}, you can adjust the new writes to use the correct precision by modifying your application to use `totimestamp(now())` instead of `currenttimestamp()` to generate millisecond-precision timestamp values that are compatible with the wire protocol.
```

> For versions starting from v2.25.0.0, v2024.2.1.0, {{<release "2024.1.4.0, 2.20.9.0">}}, the database can automatically convert timestamps with microsecond precision to milliseconds if ``cql_revert_to_partial_microsecond_support`` flag is set to ``false`` (default is `true`). When this flag is disabled (set to `false`), timestamps with microsecond precision are truncated (that is, floored) to milliseconds before being stored in underlying storage, ensuring consistency with the YCQL layer. When the flag is set to true, timestamps are stored in the underlying storage with the microseconds precision.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For versions starting from v2.25.0.0, v2024.2.1.0, {{<release "2024.1.4.0">}}, and {{<release "2.20.9.0">}}, the database can automatically convert timestamps with microsecond precision to milliseconds if `cql_revert_to_partial_microsecond_support` flag is set to false (default is true). When this flag is disabled (set to false), timestamps with microsecond precision are truncated (that is, floored) to milliseconds before being stored in underlying storage, ensuring consistency with the YCQL layer. When the flag is set to true, timestamps are stored in the underlying storage with the microseconds precision.

```

### For existing data

The above fixes **do not retroactively update** any values already inserted into the database before the fix. Existing timestamp data stored with microseconds precision will not be automatically converted, and queries involving these timestamps may still face the same issues unless the data is reinserted or updated.

> If you have already inserted data with non-zero microsecond precision, contact Yugabyte support for assistance running a script to read and re-insert the affected rows with millisecond precision.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you have already inserted data with non-zero microsecond precision, contact Yugabyte support for assistance running a script to read and re-insert the affected rows with millisecond precision.
```
```suggestion
If you have already inserted data with non-zero microsecond precision, contact {{% support-general %}} for assistance running a script to read and re-insert the affected rows with millisecond precision.
```

## Details

Cassandra (the base for YCQL) only supports timestamps with millisecond precision. However, YCQL's underlying storage can store timestamps with microsecond precision, leading to inconsistencies. When timestamps with non-zero microseconds were inserted into YCQL, they were stored in the underlying storage with microsecond precision. However, when queried, the Cassandra layer rounded these timestamps to milliseconds, losing the microsecond details.

> As a result, users encountered issues such as:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This can create issues in certain scenarios as follows:
```

> 1. **Fetch Mismatch**: When querying rows inserted using `current timestamp()` or explicit timestamp strings, the `SELECT *` would return timestamps rounded to milliseconds. If the same value was then used in a WHERE clause to filter data, it would fail to fetch the expected rows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Fetch mismatch**: When querying rows inserted using `current timestamp()` or explicit timestamp strings, the `SELECT *` query would return timestamps rounded to milliseconds. If the same value was then used in a WHERE clause to filter data, it would fail to fetch the expected rows.
```

> 1. **Index Scan Failure**: For tables with a timestamp as part of the primary key and a secondary index, index scans would fail. The secondary index would retrieve the timestamp stored in milliseconds, but when fetching the full table data from underlying storage (where it was stored in microseconds), the values would not match.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Index scan failure**: For tables with a timestamp as part of the primary key and a secondary index, index scans would fail. The secondary index would retrieve the timestamp stored in milliseconds, but when fetching the full table data from underlying storage (where it was stored in microseconds), the values would not match.
```

## Examples

With `cql_revert_to_partial_microsecond_support=true`

```cql

desc test
CREATE TABLE tempkeyspace.test (
    id int PRIMARY KEY,
    created_date timestamp
) WITH default_time_to_live = 0
    AND transactions = {'enabled': 'true'};

INSERT INTO test(id, created_date) VALUES (1, currenttimestamp()) ;

INSERT INTO test(id, created_date) VALUES (2, '2024-09-25 15:52:40.768819+0000') ;

SELECT * FROM t1;
 id | created_date
----+---------------------------------
  1 | 2024-09-30 05:54:12.340000+0000
  2 | 2024-09-25 15:52:40.768000+0000

SELECT * FROM test WHERE created_date='2024-09-30 05:54:12.340000+0000';

 id | created_date
----+--------------

SELECT * FROM test WHERE created_date='2024-09-25 15:52:40.768000+0000';

 id | created_date
----+--------------

```

> With `cql_revert_to_partial_microsecond_support=false`

Reviewer 3: Make the examples as bullets. 
- With `cql_revert_to_partial_microsecond_support=false`

Author: Done
